
## Paradata

The goal of Module 2 was to digitally remix the digital three-dimensional model of the statue of Joseph Brant that I made for Module 1. There are various ways to digitally remix a digital model. I chose to digitally remix my model by combining it with another model because this method used and further developed skills I had learned from Module 1. 

My first thought was to mashup all the statues and busts from the Valiants Memorial of which the Joseph Brant statue is a part. This combination would mean that I would have to create digital three-dimensional models of the thirteen other statues and busts. I could analyze the purpose of the memorial and the importance of the historical figures depicted in this memorial. However, I chose a different mashup after revisiting the Valiants Memorial. Since it is winter, the staircase around which the memorial is situated is blocked off, which also means that several busts were inaccessible. I created a model of the statue of Lieutenant Colonel Charles-Michel d’Irumberry de Salaberry using the app Trnio, but the digital model did not turn out very well. I decided against creating a model that combined the statues and busts of the memorial because the low quality of the model that I did create. I also felt that this mashup would lose much of its meaning without the inclusion of all the historical figures depicted in the model. Although this combination would not work for my purposes, the creating a meaningful model was still important.

I analyzed the object biography I wrote for Module 1 in search for another subject with which I would combine my model of the statue of Brant. My goal was to create a remixed model that built upon that biography. I decided that I wanted to draw attention to the controversies around Brant and his legacy. Brant normally dressed in colonial fashion, but he was always portrayed in “Indian dress” (Hutchinson, 2011). He played an active role in the negotiations between Indigenous and European cultures and his self-portrayal played a part in those negotiations. His legacy depends on how people interpret Brant’s self-presentation and his actions. He could have betrayed his people by advocating for assimilation and he could also have been a forward thinker who established Indigenous authority in a colonial world (Hutchinson, 2011, p. 214). I chose to create a model that presented Brant as he might have been seen. I wanted to represent his role in the religious community and in European culture. 

My decision to represent Brant’s legacy in my model were based, in part, on questions raised in class on February 5, 2018. Two questions that stood out to me were: 
1.Where is authority here?
2.Who is the author?
The statue of Brant in the Valiants Memorial is a creation of both Brant and the artist. Brant sat for many portraits in his lifetime and always ensured that his indigeneity was obvious in these portraits. Marlene Hilton Moore, the sculptor of the Valiants Memorial, also depicted Brant in Indian dress in accord with previous depictions of him. However, I have removed Brant’s authority in his self-depiction by combining him with a model of a bishop. I have depicted a pre-existing narrative that differs from Brant’s self-presentation in my model. I am not the author of this narrative and I am not the author of this model and its meaning. Brant’s self-representation do not show whether he was an assimilationist, a forward thinker or a combination of the two; that is for individuals to interpret and decide for themselves. However, my model connects him to European culture and religion. This connection could be interpreted as suggesting that the narrative of Brant promoting British culture and Christian religion is important and “true”. I do not mean to interpret Brant’s legacy, but rather draw attention to the complexities of the various narratives that may be attributed to him. 

Once I had decided upon an idea of the narrative and biography I wanted to create in my remixed model, I had to find models with which I could combine my model of Brant. I searched sketchfab for models and I looked through the British Museum’s account on sketchfab. My search included key words such as “European settler”, “monk”, “priest”, “colonist” and “first American”. I filtered out the models based on whether or not they were downloadable and whether or not they were able to retain that which they represented when taken out of context. The first model that I liked was “Brother Lee Love” by _Ramen_. 

Before I moved on to creating the new remixed model, I edited my model of Brant from Module 1. I created used Meshlab to erase the background from my model. I then uploaded the edited model to sketchfab.

The first problem I encountered was in importation of the files I downloaded from sketchfab. I downloaded my newly edited model of Brant and the model “Brother Lee Love”. I then extracted the files that I had downloaded. However , the folders containing the files I downloaded were empty when I opened them in Meshmixer. Professor Shawn Graham informed me that the files would need to be extracted a second time when I contacted him. 

The second problem I encountered was with the model “Brother Lee Love”. This model was animated and was not saved as an OBJ file in either of the extractions. Therefore, I could not upload this file to Meshmixer. After searching sketchfab for an alternative, I found the model “Bishop saint” created by Geoffrey Marchal. 

The next step was to combine the models using Meshmixer, which is where I struggled the most. The program kept pausing and saying that it was “Not Responding”. It also crashed a couple of times. As someone who does not play video games and mostly uses a laptop for writing papers and watching Netflix, I do not require a laptop with the capacity to handle complicated programs. I suspect that my struggles with the program relate to my Dell computer’s capacities. It was taking a very long time to create a remixed model resembling something decent because of the time the program took to complete each task and the amount of times it stopped responding. Therefore, I decide to try and shortcut that process through Meshlab. 

I imported the edited model of Brant from Module 1 to Meshlab. I removed the body of the statue and uploaded the head of the statue to sketchfab. I downloaded the head from sketchfab and extracted the file twice. I then imported the head to my model in Meshmixer. 

I then worked to cut and align the head of Brant with the body of the bishop. I got them aligned but the sculpting tool was not working very well for me. I exported the file and uploaded to sketchfab, but I failed to combine to two models before doing so, which mean that I only uploaded the head to sketchfab. I went back to Meshmixer to combine the two models and sometime during that process the program crashed. I managed to save the work that I had done. However, the object browser did not appear again when I got the program to work again. Therefore, I was unable to determine if I had managed to combine the two models into one before the crash and if I had not been able to do so, I was unable to do so now without the object browser. I saved and exported whatever was in that file. When I was exporting the file, Meshmixer said that there was a “Complex object in scene: One or more objects being exported is complex (non-manifold). The resulting mesh file may have errors.” I exported the file anyway and uploaded it to sketchfab. Fortunately, the file I uploaded to sketchfab contained both the head and the body. Unfortunately, my model on sketchfab was lacking colour and a lot of texture. It makes it difficult to tell that it is Brant’s head on the bishop’s body. Nevertheless, I have admitted defeat in the face of Meshmixer and will leave it at that.  

