
## Paradata

The purpose of Module 3 is to translate Joseph Brant into a game world. 

My first thought was to create a game that would explore the decisions that Brant made in his lifetime and why. However, I found that this idea was more complex than what I was prepared to work on. He made a lot of controversial decisions and I did not want to get into the ethics of deciding whether those decisions were “good” or “bad”. Throughout the course Critical Making in Digital History, I have tried to present a balanced representation of Brant. We discussed the importance of the mechanics of a game in class. Mechanics are important in representing the social rules of the game and the relationships of the characters. The rules and relationships show the consequences of different actions. I think it would take more time than I have to figure out appropriate consequences for a variety of actions. Furthermore, I do not wish to represent Brant and his actions as either negative or positive. I try to be objective, but objectivity is always shaped by one’s experiences and knowledge. I do not wish to present an idea as objective when it is not. Therefore, I decided against the idea of creating a game to analyze Brant’s decisions. 

My next idea was to create a twitterbot for Brant. This would be a twitterbot that would present a variety of facts about Brant and hopefully, the algorithm would also tweet false claims about him. I saw this as a way of looking at the narrative about Brant. I though it would be interesting to see what kind of narrative the twitterbot would present based on the facts that I inputted. I decided against creating a twitterbot after looking how one programs a twitterbot. It seemed like I would have too great an impact on the false narrative. The twitterbot relied too heavily on the formula for my analysis of a fictional narrative. 

I decided to create a game on Twine the decisions that would be made by historians when interpreting history. I was inspired by a quote from Shawn Graham’s article The Archaeologist Who Studied Video Games and the Things He Learned There: “Archaeogaming requires treating a game world, a world bound and defined by the limitations of its hardware, software, and coding choices, as both a closed universe and as an extension of the external culture that created it” (2016, p. 18). This quotation had me thinking about the contexts and theories that are used when interpret history. My opinion changes on different topics as I learn more about them. Knowledge is not static, and it is important to understand the bias present in history. I decided to create a game that analyzed the decisions and bias of a person who was interpreting Brant and how that might affect the depiction of Brant. 

While creating this game, I looked at my own decisions and bias in interpreting Brant. The first question I posed was whether the player wanted to identify him as Joseph Brant or Thayendanegea, which is his traditional name, which he was given at birth. I had decided to identify him as Brant when I worked on Module 1. I made this decision because this is the name I recognized him by from history classes in primary or secondary school, and because I thought it would be difficult to remember how to write Thayendanegea since I was unfamiliar with this name. After writing his Mohawk name many times, I can say that it takes a little effort to remember, but it is not difficult to learn how to write Thayendanegea. Thanks to James W. Paxton’s book, I can now pronounce Thayendanegea’s name properly in my head: “Tai-yen-da-nay-geh” (2008, p. 5). 

The idea that History (the discipline) is about deciding what to omit and what to include, which was discussed in class, was also important in my work on the game. History is about picking and choosing facts to create a picture. I looked at the choices I made in depicting Brant because of this idea. Paxton wrote quite a lot about Brant’s sister and mother in his biography on Brant. Brant’s sister, Molly Brant, is an important historical figure in her own right. However, I chose to exclude her because she could easily take over my summary of Joseph Brant and I wanted to focus solely on him. I exclude his family – his mother, sister, wives and children – from my summary of his life because they do not seem very important in my discussion of his actions and his roles as statesman and warrior. In writing this paragraph, I feel the need to mention that his marriages to his three wives were not concurrent. This need to mention this detail is probably due to my unfamiliarity with the Mohawk culture and believing that others could perceive this detail differently and then interpret it in a negative light. That I mentioned that his marriages were not concurrent shows my own bias; I decided to include that in this paragraph. The idea that History is about one’s decision to omit and include different facts presents a complex discussion and a lot of introspection. I think this is such an important notion in the interpretation of history that I mentioned it in my game. 

When looking at the mechanics of the game, I thought about providing consequences for the game if the summary showed too much bias. For example, I thought that maybe if the player chose to emphasize Brant’s relationship to the Church in his summary that the curator of that exhibit should tell the player to go back and rewrite the summary because it shows too much bias. However, I decided against that because I thought it was more of a reflection of my own bias than of the players; I think that Brant’s greatest contribution to history, whether good, bad or neutral, is his role as a statesman. I decided that the style of game I was working on did not require consequences such as that. I was interpreting consequences as a negative effect of an action, but a consequence does not necessarily have to be negative. The consequences of one’s choices were in the summary of Brant that came out of those choices. The consequences are not immediately evident to a player and are not a punishment for a decision; the consequences are the omittances and inclusions in the depiction of Brant. 

Even choosing the title of the game (Who is he? Joseph Brant / Thayendanegea) showed bias. The first part of the title is based on a meme. I thought it was funny and it seemed to accurately describe the purpose of this game in analyzing who Brant might be. “Who is he?” could be taken as evidence that I grew up with the internet, but it is not ultimately important to this discussion. It the second part (“Joseph Brant / Thayendanegea”) that was an issue for me. The purpose of the game is to interpret him oneself and I did not want to project bias onto the title. I did not want to suggest that one name is how one should identify him through the use of only one name or in putting one name first. Nevertheless, I felt that the title without a name would be too vague and one name would have a clear implication that that is how one should identify him. I identified this historical figure as Joseph Brant throughout all the modules for HIST 3812 so I put his Christian name first. Bias was inevitable, so I accepted it. 

I wondered, after having completed the video game, if it was too theoretical in translating the artefact from Module 1 and/or Module 2 into a game world. Neither artefact is directly present in the Twine game and neither is discussed directly in the game. The game is a discussion of what the artefacts from Module 1 (a controversial historical figure) and Module 2 (a whitewashed depiction of Brant that emphasizes his relationship to the Church and the British) represent and how one might have reached those representations. It is a theoretical translation and not a physical translation of the earlier modules into this game world. 
