
## Process Notes

The first step in creating Module 4 for HIST 3812 was deciding how I wanted to bring my work back into the physical world. I decided on created an Augmented Reality (AR) experience. I wanted to continue my previous efforts in Module 2 and 3 to challenge the audience to think critically and recognize that there are multiple interpretations of Brant. 

I used HP Reveal to create my AR experience. I created an account and downloaded the app on my phone. I did I quick trial run where I overlaid a picture of my dog on a trigger photo of a pen. HP Reveal allows its users to overlay something over a trigger photo so that when one uses the app and holds the camera above the appropriate trigger, the overlaid photo, video or 3D model can be seen on one’s phone. I had difficulty getting it to work on my phone, so I talked to Professor Graham about it. He suggested that I would need clearer photos with obvious borders and markers for the trigger to be easily recognizable. I wanted to have people go through books in the MacOdrum Library and find pieces of information about Brant. However, pages full of text do not have the clear border required for this project and they are difficult to differentiate from each other. I kept the same idea, but I changed the pages I used as my trigger photos. I originally planned to have pictures overlaid on the covers of books to direct the audience to pages within the book where there would be more pictures overlaid in the AR experience. I changed my focus to pages with pictures and other distinct pages like the first page of a new chapter. 

I organized the narrative of the AR experience around the idea that Brant’s first wife, Neggen, would be correcting a few misconceptions about him in different books. She would guide the audience through this experience. After figuring out which books and which pages I wanted to use in my AR experience, I took photographs of the pages and uploaded the pictures to my computer. I ended up with seven different trigger photos from five different books. I then wrote the text that I wanted to have over the trigger photographs in the app. I used the snipping tool on my Dell computer, which uses Windows, to take a picture of the text I had written. I uploaded my trigger photos and my overlaying images onto HP Reveal. I had to choose a different page for Ernle Bradford’s *Christopher Columbus* (1973) because it was not distinctive enough for the program to recognize. However, all the other pages worked when I tested the AR experience. 

One of the biggest challenges I faced was when I tried to overlay my 3D model of Brant (eptr, 2018) from Module 1 onto the second trigger photo. I wanted the second piece in my AR experience to explain a little about who Brant was and to have a 3D model of his statue in Ottawa over a picture of the statue of him in Brantford in Isabel Thompson Kelsay’s book (1984, p. 657). I googled how to upload a 3D model to HP Reveal. I found instructions that said that the model needed to be formatted as a .dae file for it to be uploaded (HP Reveal, 2018). I did not know how to convert the .obj file that the model was saved as into a .dae file and I could not figure it out. I tried to find a site that could convert the file, but the file was too large. I then consulted Professor Graham for assistance. 

Professor Graham gave me to instructions as to how I could upload the 3D model to HP Reveal. I opened the object in Meshlab (Cignoni and Ranzuglia, 2016) and exported it as a .dae file. His next instruction was to make a thumbnail photo in a .png file, but I could not save the photo as a .png file and I did not understand the purpose of the thumbnail photo. Therefore, I sidelined the thumbnail and worked on the next part. The next step was to put the .dae file, the texture file and the thumbnail, which I did not have, into a folder and to compress that folder into a .tar file. He suggested that I use 7-Zip (Pavlov, 2018) to compress the folder. I downloaded 7-Zip, but could not figure out how to use it. I came to a halt at that point.

I met with Professor Graham for further instructions on how to compress the files. Before we compressed the file, he explained the thumbnail a little more and had me chose a photo for the it. I did not have the tools to convert the .jpg file of the photo into a .png file. I emailed the photo to Professor Graham, who then converted it and send it back. We then compressed the file using 7-Zip and then uploaded it to HP Reveal. However, there was a problem with the model and I could not overlay it onto my trigger photo. 

Professor Graham then directed me to shrink the 3D model in Meshlab. We used the Cleaning and Repairing tools to remove the duplicate faces and vertices from the model. We also used the tool “Simplification: Quadric Edge Collapse Decimation” to decrease the number of target faces in the model from 79,741 to 50,000. We exported the new smaller file as a .dae file and then used  7-Zip to convert it into a .tar file. I then uploaded the 3D model to HP Reveal and overlaid it on the appropriate trigger photo. However, the overlay did not work. The program was saying that there was an unknown bitmap error. I had no idea what to do at that point and would have given up had I been doing this alone. Professor Graham, however, figured out that there was a problem with the texture file. We then converted the texture file, which was a .jpg file, into a .png file and then redid the process of compressing the file and uploading it to HP Reveal. 

The 3D model was finally overlaid on the appropriate trigger photo. I tried to resize it, but I could not. I saved the file and then tested it on the HP Reveal app. The 3D model appeared on my phone when I held it above the trigger photo, but it was a miniscule and indistinct. I had successfully created an AR experience with a 3D model, but the model was too small to be of much use to my AR experience. Therefore, I decided not to use the 3D model in the AR experience.

I completed Module 4 with a AR experience that used only images of text. Fortunately, the 3D model was not necessary to the narrative of the AR experience. 

