
## Paradata

The purpose of Module 4 is to bring my digital creations in the course HIST 3812 back into the physical world, which I did through an Augmented Reality (AR) experience. 

My plan was to create a AR narrative in which the ghost of Brant had left behind clues that could only be found by using one’s phone. Professor Graham had instructed the class to frame the game in a way that required the audience to use their phones to experience the augmented reality so that they could avoid breaks in presence. I decided to create an AR experience in which the ghost of Brant would guide the narrative. 

When I first planned the narrative for my AR experience, I wanted to frame it in a way that Brant would be able to address certain misconceptions about his past. I wanted him to be able to contextualize his legacy within his time period. However, I found that the narrative I was writing was too subjective. I was writing about my understanding of Brant and presenting it as his truth. I was writing from my perspective as a non-Indigenous person who has taken one anthropology course on Indigenous peoples in North America and who has read several texts about Brant specifically for the modules for HIST 3812. Anything written from the perspective of Brant would suggest that it the information that was being told was true. However, no one will ever fully or truly understand Brant’s truth, by which I mean what he believed to be true and his intentions, because people are too complex for us to fully understand and he is dead and cannot tell his story. I wanted to encourage critical thinking and challenge misconceptions; I did not want to propose a single truth and a single interpretation of Brant. Therefore, I decided to tell the narrative from a third-party. I chose to write the narrative from my imagining of the perspective of Brant’s first wife, Neggen Aoghyatonghsera. 

I framed the narrative as a critical analysis and a historical exploration of several secondary sources. I did not want to interpret the information in the books, but I wanted to show how some bias might be present in some of these sources. I wanted to demonstrate that there are a multiple interpretations and representations of Brant that a person can make or read. I had focused on the subjectivity of history and the multiple representations people create about a single person, event or thing throughout my previous modules for HIST 3812, and I wanted to continue this emphasis in Module 4. 

While reading Zena Kamash’s article “‘Postcard to Palmyra’: bringing the public into debates over post-conflict reconstruction in the Middle East” (2017), I was reminded of the importance of the audience. She wrote about the multiple definitions of “authentic” and she proposed Holtorf’s model of “pastness” as a way to understand authenticity (Kamash, 2017, p. 612). She wrote that “pastness requires a correspondence with the expectations of the audience” (Kamash, 2017, p. 612). In other words, what is authentic or real depends on the perspective of the audience. In this AR experience, I wanted to remind the audience that good and bad are human constructs dependent on one’s culture. Any interpretation will be influence by the lived experience and the perspective of the audience. It is important to know something about Brant’s culture when interpreting and judging him. Kamash’s article reminded me of why I decided to create this narrative for my AR experience. 

I brought the narrative of critical analysis back into the physical world from the digital world I had contextualized this emphasis in Module 2 and 3. I challenged ideas in physical secondary sources to remind people that critical analysis must be applied to their real lives. 

Furthermore, I tried and ultimately succeeded in returning my 3D model from Module 1 to the physical world. It could be seen through the HP Reveal app when connected with the appropriate trigger image. However, I removed it from the AR experience because it had changed too much from my original to be significant or meaningful in the way that I wanted it to be. It the same in most ways, except that it was too small for people to see it properly and to know what it was. In a metaphorical way, this change in formatting suggests that changing the constructions of historical artefacts and ways of understanding history can bring new meaning, but it can also take away from the original meaning. 
