# The Bibliography of a Statue of Joseph Brant

### The Valiants Memorial

Joseph Brant (Thayendanegea) is a historical figure who played a prominent role in Canadian history around the time of the American Revolution. Brant is memorialized as a statue at the intersection of Elgin Street and Wellington Street. The plaque next to the statue describes Brant as a “notable Mohawk warrior and statesman, and principal war chief of the Six Nations, [who] led his people in support of the British” (Moore and McEwen, 2006).
  
The statue of Brant is part of the Valiants Memorial, which was created by Marlene Hilton Moore and John McEwen in 2006. The Government of Canada describes the memorial as “a collection of nine busts and five statues depicting individuals who played a role in major conflicts throughout [Canadian] history” (2017). The memorial focuses on honouring individuals from five distinct time periods: the French Regime, the American Revolution, the War of 1812, the First World War and the Second World War. These individuals are Comte de Frontenac, Pierre Le Moyne d’Iberville, Joseph Brant, Colonel John Butler, General Sir Isaac Brock, Lieutenant Colonel Charles-Michel d’Irumberry de Salaberry, Laura Secord, Matron Georgina Pope, General Sir Arthur Currie, Corporal Joseph Kaeble, Lieutenant Hampton Grey, Captain John Wallace Thomas, Major Paul Triquet and Pilot Officer Andrew Mynarski (Government of Canada, 2017). Brant is one of the two individuals depicted from the American Revolution. 

The statue of Brant is a life-sized model of the man that was “as historically accurate and true to life as sculptor Marlene Hilton Moore could make” (Canadian War Museum, 2015). Moore sculpted the face and hands of the statue from clay and then dressed the cast models in duplicates of historical clothing. The models were then cast in bronze. John Moses – then Acting Curator of Easter Woodlands Ethnology at the Canadian Museum of History – assisted Moore with the historical accuracy of the statue of Brant by showing her historical items of clothing and by introducing her to a moccasin maker (Canadian War Museum, 2015). The final result is a rather life-like bronze statue of Brant that closely resembles his portraits. 

### Joseph Brant (1743-1807)

Brant is a controversial historical figure and one of the most well-known Indigenous peoples of his time. John Sugden describes him as “a man with a foot in both Indian and white cultures” (1996). Brant is best known for his work in both secular and religious spheres, and in both European and Indigenous spheres. 

Brant was a Mohawk born in circa 1743 Ohio. From 1761 to 1763, he attended Eleazar Wheelock’s school in Lebanon, Connecticut where he learned about English language and culture (Preston, 2005). Brant worked as an interpreter for Sir William Johnson, superintendent of Indian Affairs, and as a secretary to Johnson’s successor and nephew, Guy Johnson. Interpreters were mediators and negotiators between Indigenous peoples and settlers; they navigated both languages and cultures to support both sides (Hagedorn, 1988). Brant presented himself as “both the Native diplomat and the modern gentleman” through his clothing and his demeanor (Hutchinson, 2011, p. 223). He lived in both cultures and encouraged others to do the same. 
  
In 1775 to 1776, Brant travelled to London with Guy Johnson, where he represented Indigenous land grievances to the British government (Preston, 2005). Brant returned to North America with British pledges of support and protection that convinced him to support the British in the American Revolution (1775-1783). He broke the Iroquois Confederacy’s policy of neutrality and raised a party of Indigenous and British Loyalists to fight against the American militia (Sugden, 1996). Ultimately, the British lost the war and were unable to keep their promises to the Indigenous peoples who relied on them protect them from Americans who were taking their lands. For the Indigenous peoples of North America, the war had divided the Iroquois Confederacy and various nations who had been forced to pick sides (Sugden, 1996). 

After the war, Brant negotiated the Haldimand Proclamation of 1784, which granted the Iroquois a large tract of land on the Grand River (Hutchinson, 2011). This Proclamation was later the subject of controversy around Indigenous ownership of land when Brant sold approximately 350,000 acres of the land for income despite resistance for the British (Sugden, 1996). His sale of the land is seen as progressive in that it set a precedent for Indigenous ownership of land and what that constitutes, or it is seen as a bad decision because the Iroquois could have done more with the land they lost than they could with the little money that they earned from the sale. Although this was a controversial move in Brant’s part, it was not his most controversial legacy. 

Brant is controversial because of his participation in both Indigenous and European cultures. He converted to Christianity early in his life and spent his later years translating religious texts into Mohawk. Although he was proud of his culture, he was seen as an assimilationist because he encouraged Indigenous peoples to convert to Christianity and because he supported British schooling (Sugden, 1996). Peter Farrugia perhaps best describes the controversies around Brant when he wrote:
<indent>For commentators who seek to preserve traditional Aboriginal culture, Brant is seen either as someone who sold out his people without 
<indent>compunction, or who was fooled by the practised tongues of the British colonizers. Those who see accommodation to the presence of 
<indent>British as far-sighted, however, regard Brant’s policies as sagacious (2012, p. 131). 
One’s views on Brant are shaped by how one views Canadian history and the country’s relationship with Indigenous peoples. Brant’s acceptance of British people and their culture can been viewed to have positive, negative or both effects on the future of Indigenous peoples in North America.  Brant is an important figure in Canadian history, no matter how one views him, because of these controversies and how they helped shaped Canada. 
  
  

