# Paradata

The goal of Module 1 was to create a digital three-dimensional model of a historical artefact, site or building. This model would be made using three-dimensional photogrammetry. The materials used were an iPhone and a Dell computer. The programs and apps I used were Trnio, VSCO, Gimp, Exiftool, Soda PDF and Regard3D.  

My first task was to pick an object to replicate for my model. The first place I search was the Canadian Museum of History (CMH). I chose this place out of convenience; I already had plans to visit the DreamWorks Animation exhibition at the CMH with a friend.  I used the Trnio app to try and create models of artefacts because this was the only way to make a model with which I was familiar. I encountered two problems at the museum: the lighting and the spacing. The first problem was that the lighting was too low. I tried to scan an Indigenous person’s mask, but the lighting was too dark in the Grand Hall for it to produce a good model. When I moved to a different room in the museum, I encountered similar difficulties with the lighting. The second problem was the space around the artefacts. In order to scan an object, I needed to be able to circle the object and get pictures of it from each side. Most artefacts are either held in cases against a wall or in cases with multiple other artefacts. I did not bother to try to scan the items held in cases against walls because I knew I would be able to scan less than 180 degrees around the object; which would create a model that was more two-dimensional than three-dimensional, if anything. The objects held in cases in the middle of a room, such as the Indigenous person’s mask, tended not to be the only artefact in the case. This positioning meant that it that I would be taking photographs of other objects as I tried to take pictures of the artefact that I wanted to recreate or that poles holding the other artefacts in the case at different heights would obscure the photographs. Ultimately, I was unsuccessful in finding an object to recreate as a three-dimensional model for my project.  

Although my trip to the CMH was not as successful as I had hoped, I was able to determine a few things to change about my approach to this project. I found that there were consistently gaps in my digital models of artefacts. I determined that I needed to be steadier when circling an artefact and that I should take more photographs. 

The next place I searched for a historical artefact to scan was downtown Ottawa. This location was also a matter of convenience; as part of a practicum, I work one day a week at the National Capital Commission, which is located downtown on Elgin Street. I took a walk during my lunch break to search for an object. I chose to look during my lunch because it would be much brighter outside than it would be after I was done work. I walked down Sparks Street in search of an artefact. Although that street had a variety of interesting sculptures, I decided against recreating any of them because they lacked plaques. Plaques name and describe sculptures, and without one I felt that it would be difficult to create a biography for the object. I also walked past the statue of Terry Fox, but I chose not to do that one because I knew some other people had recreated that statue already. My search was concluded when I crossed Elgin Street to the National War Memorial.
	
I finally settled on recreating the statue of Joseph Brant. I approached the National War Memorial, but I was not planning on actually recreating that memorial. I felt that that memorial was larger than I would be able to feel confident reproducing. Nevertheless, I approached the memorial because I was cold and I wanted to scan something before I went back to work. I probably subconsciously hoped that there would be more statues nearby. Fortunately, the Valiants Memorial is adjacent to the National War Memorial and I could see statues of people in nearby. The two statues closest to me were that of Pierre Le Moyne d’Iberville and Joseph Brant. I chose to work with the statue of Brant because I knew a little about him. I learned a little about Brant in my first-year seminar class on Revolution and War in the Making of Canada. I also thought that focusing my Digital History projects on Brant could connect in an interesting way with an anthropology course I am taking on Indigenous peoples in North America. Although I noticed the other busts and statues that make up the Valiants Memorial, I did not know that the statue of Brant was part of a larger memorial until I started researching the statue.  

I approached recreating the statue of Brant by taking a total of sixty-two photographs of it on my phone.  I took so many photographs because I wanted to avoid having gaps in my model. By this point in time, I had learned about the program Regard3D on which I could upload pictures to create a digital three-dimensional model. Therefore, I took a lot of photographs of the statue rather than scanning it using the app Trnio. Looking back on the photographs I took, I did not to a good job of keeping a steady hand. I approached my problem of having gaps in my model by taking more photographs rather than taking quality photographs. The cold also influenced the pictures that I took in that I was in a bit of a hurry to put my mittens back on and in that the snow and ice crunched under my feet, which affected my steadiness. 

Once I had the photographs of the artefact, I was set to start making my digital three-dimensional model of the statue. I took note of two suggestions that had been proposed in class; it was suggested that we lighten or brighten the photographs and that we erase the background from the pictures. These suggestions would ensure that the program used to create the model could pick up the details that might be easier to miss in the dark and that the background would not be included in the model. I used the app VSCO to brighten my pictures and then I uploaded them to my computer. Then, using Gimp, which was the editing program suggested in class, I began to erase the background from my sixty-two photographs. 

The next time I was downtown, I revisited the statue of Brant and scanned it using Trnio. It was taking a long time to erase the background in each picture, so I thought I should try a different way to make a model on the off chance that I did not erase the backgrounds in time. The model on Trnio turned out acceptable to my needs at the time, which was just to have a backup model. There were not as many gaps as I had worried about, but I did have to accept that I would be unable to include the back of the statue in my model because the bannister behind the statue, which stands at the top of a staircase. The quality was also low. The main thing that I disliked about this model was that it included a lot of the background. I tried to edit out some of the background using the “Trim” feature on the app, but it did not work. I was left with an adequate model that, at the very least, showed that I tried. 

Shortly after creating a model on Trnio, I finished erasing the background from the sixty-two pictures of the statue. I downloaded Exiftool, which I had learned in class was necessary to include the focal lengths of the photographs required by Regard3D. Once I had saved the photographs from Exiftool, I uploaded them to Regard3D. The program told me that “The focal length is known for too few pictures. Triangulation will fail” (Regard3D, 2015). After analyzing the situation, I determined that the problem was likely due to the pictures from Gimp being .exe files and not .jpeg files. I then googled how to convert pictures from Gimp into .jpeg pictures. The website “ask ubuntu” provided instructions as to how I could convert a photograph from Gimp to .jpeg or .png, which was done by exporting the photographs from Gimp (Matthijssen, 2014). I exported the sixty-two photographs, which automatically saved them as .png files. I uploaded the .png pictures to Exiftool and then uploaded the new versions to Regard3D. I was once again told that I did not have enough focal length data to create a three-dimensional model. I returned to the pictures for a final time. I found Soda PDF on Google and I used the website to convert the .png files to .jpg files. I then uploaded the .jpg files to Exiftool. Once I’d exported the pictures from Exiftool, I uploaded them to Regard3D. I was once again unable to create a three-dimensional model because of a lack of data about focal length. I concluded that I was done with Regard3D and these programs that I had no idea how to use before this course. 

I returned to the model that I made using Trnio and uploaded the model to Sketchfab. It uploaded sideways and I do not know how to fix that.   

There are several possibilities as to what went wrong and why Regard3D did not work for me. The following are my suspicions of what might have gone wrong: 
- The angles of the pictures were too varied;
- VSCO erased some pertinent information when I exported the photographs from the app; and/or
- The required data got lost in the various times that I used Exiftool or in the variations of the photographs.



### Reflection

I recreated the statue of Joseph Brant as a three-dimensional model. This recreation is not a recreation of the man but of the statue. Bruno Latour and Adam Lowe discussed the concept of an original work of art, subsequent reproductions and whether or not the aura is transferable in their article “The migration of the aura or how to explore the original through its fac similes” (2010). I am curious as to how their ideas relate to a man who was once alive and the various depictions of him. Art cannot capture the aura of a human being; however, art can capture the legend of the person. Standing in front of the statue of Brant, I did not feel as if I was standing in front of the man. He stopped being a man after his death and he became a symbol. Brant symbolizes colonialism, assimilation, pride in one’s indigeneity, Canadian pride or enlightenment depending on who is analyzing his past and what their biases may be. The statue captures some of what he symbolizes but not who he was. Latour and Bruno argued that a work of art needs to be reproduced in order to continue to be relevant (2010). This statue ensures the continued remembrance of Brant by commemorating the man and propagating what he represents. 
 
 

