
## Rubric
I propose dividing the twenty points allocated to Module 3 so that three points are for the readings, five points are for drawing from class discussions, six points are for the thing itself, four points for the process notes, and two points for the degree to which the object fosters engagement. However, I have been happy with the marks I got for Module 1 and 2, so I am also happy to use the normal rubric. 

### My reasoning 
I think the integration of the class discussions and readings to the context of the object were more important than the annotations themselves. Therefore, I decreased the value of the annotations to three points, while keeping the integration of course materials at five points. However, this decision is influenced by the difficulty I had responding to the articles for Module 3 and the fact that I am slightly behind in some of the readings. I do not play video games so some of the discussions about archaeology in video games were a little confusing; I did not feel like I had much to add.  
I increased the points dedicated to the object itself and added the section for fostering engagement because of the time and thought that went into the creation of my text-based game. Module 3 required more creativity, thinking and analysis than the earlier modules. It is important for the audience for the audience to engage with the object for it to have any value; therefore, I think it is important that I be graded on how well I fostered that engagement. 
I lowered the value of the process notes because the creation of the game was pretty straightforward. I was not challenged by unfamiliar and difficult programs in Module 3 as I was with the other modules. For Module 3, I used only one program and that was Twine. It could also be that it was straightforward because I did not experiment with what Twine could do. I focused on the text and the narrative because that is where I thought there was the most value for my game. 
