
## Object Biography

### Joseph Brant
https://github.com/EmileePetrie/Notebook/tree/master/Module-1.md/object-biography.md

### Bishop Brant
https://github.com/EmileePetrie/Notebook/tree/master/Module-2.md/object-biography.md

### Who is he? Joseph Brant / Thayendanegea
This textual game explores different interpretations of Brant and the decisions that led to those interpretations. Brant is a controversial historical figure. Some people see him an assimilationist, while others see him as a forward thinker. He supported the British in the American Revolution. He was an Anglican who translated sermons into the Mohawk language. He led the Six Nations to a settlement on Grand River, for which he had negotiated with General Haldimand. His actions have been interpreted in a variety of ways depending on how one views the current political climate in Canada between Indigenous peoples and the government. This game looks at how one might understand Brant as the controversial historical figure described in Module 1 and as "Bishop Brant", who was greatly influenced by British culture and religion, described in Module 2. 

“Who is he? Joseph Brant / Thayendanegea” is meant to criticize the choices one makes when interpreting history. The study and representation of history is about choosing what to omit and what to include in the depiction of history. This game allows players to decide what they wish to emphasize and omit in their depiction of Brant and how they wish to interpret his actions. The purpose of this game is not to suggest that one of these interpretations is more correct than another, but to suggest that history is a personal experience. One understands history through the context of one’s own knowledge and one’s experiences. 

### Biographies in "Who is he? Joseph Brant / Thayendanegea"

#### BRANT – CHURCH EMPHASIS – RELATIONSHIP WITH BRITAIN IS BAD
Joseph Brant (Thayendanegea): 1743-1807
	Joseph Brant was born to Margaret and Peter Thowaghwengaraghkwin, a Mohawk family, in 1743. Brant, born Thayendanegea, was given the name Joseph when he was baptized in an Anglican church as a child. He grew up in Mohawk Valley, which was a community and region that fostered diversity and relationships with settlers. Brant was greatly influenced by the multicultural community in which he was raised. 
	In 1760, Brant began attended Moor’s Charity School, which was operated by minister Eleazar Wheelock. Wheelock sought to civilize his Indigenous charges and assimilate them into English culture. Wheelock wrote to William Johnson, the head of the Indian Department and Brant’s brother-in-law, to request Johnson’s support of his mission. Johnson sent Brant and two other Six Nations boys to Wheelock with the hope that they could work for the Indian Department after receiving an education. Brant was spared from the harsh treatment often distributed by Wheelock because Johnson was his sponsor. Brant also arrived at the school with some knowledge of the English language, which Wheelock saw as proof that Brant was nearer to being an English gentleman than a savage like the other boys. Brant attended Moor’s Charity School for three years before returning home. 
	Brant’s education influenced in the roles he took up in that he worked as an unofficial negotiator of cultures. He worked as an interpreter before becoming an assistant to the Anglican minister Reverend John Stuart in 1772. As Stuart’s assistant, he translated sermons, the Gospel of St. Mark and other works into Mohawk. Even after he no longer worked for Stuart, he continued to translate religious texts into Mohawk. He would finish the Mohawk Prayer Book that he started with Brant after the American Revolution (1775-1783). 
	With the outbreak of the American Revolution, Brant advocated for the Six Nations to support the British in the war as a way to preserve his people’s way of life. He travelled to Britain in 1775 with the goal of obtaining assurances that Great Britain would address long-standing Mohawk grievances. Lord George Germain, the colonial secretary, agreed to address Mohawk land disputes once the American rebellion had been resolved, thus ensuring that the Mohawk would support the British in the war. Brant returned to North America and created the party Brant’s Volunteers, which was composed of Indigenous warriors and Loyalists, to fight the Americans in the war. He gained a reputation as a fierce warrior and earned the rank of captain. 
	After the war, Brant took on a more diplomatic role. In keeping with their promise, the British granted Brant a tract of land, which they bought from the Mississaugas. He settled over 1,800 Six Nations people along the Grand River. In order to generate some income for the Six Nations and lessen their dependence on the government, Brant sold and leased some of the tract at Grand River to settlers. The right of Indigenous peoples to sell or lease land was challenged by the Upper Canada and imperial governments. According to the Royal Proclamation of 1763, Indigenous peoples could only sell their land to the Crown and not to individual settlers. The legality of Brant’s land leases was called in to question and their ambiguous legality affected the income that his leases brought in. Brant eventually compromised with the government so that he would sell the land to the Crown, who would then transfer the land and its legal title to Brant’s buyers. Nevertheless, Brant continued to fight for the deed to Grand River and the right to sell the land until he fell sick and died in 1807. 
	Brant influenced the current relationship between Indigenous peoples and the Crown. He saw the relationship as economically and politically beneficial, but, at the end of his life, he acknowledged that the British had created barriers to the prosperity of the Six Nations. Although he promoted and fostered the relationship between the Six Nations and the government, he fought for Indigenous sovereignty. 

#### BRANT – CHURCH EMPHASIS – RELATIONSHIP WITH BRITAIN IS GOOD
Joseph Brant (Thayendanegea): 1743-1807
	Joseph Brant was born to Margaret and Peter Thowaghwengaraghkwin, a Mohawk family, in 1743. Brant, born Thayendanegea, was given the name Joseph when he was baptized in an Anglican church as a child. He grew up in Mohawk Valley, which was a community and region that fostered diversity and relationships with settlers. Mohawks had allowed German and Scots-Irish families to settle on their land. Mutually, economically beneficial relationships were created out of proximity and friendships developed from those relationships. Brant was greatly influenced by the multicultural community in which he was raised.  
	In 1760, Brant began attended Moor’s Charity School, which was operated by minister Eleazar Wheelock. Wheelock sought to educate his Indigenous charges and assimilate them into English culture. Wheelock wrote to William Johnson, the head of the Indian Department and Brant’s brother-in-law, to request Johnson’s support of his mission. Johnson sent Brant and two other Six Nations boys to Wheelock with the hope that an English education would foster future politically and economically beneficial relationship between the boys and the Indian Department. Brant, who knew a little English before arriving at the school, became proficient in oral and written communication in the English language. He attended Moor’s Charity School for three years before returning home. 
	Brant’s education proved beneficial in the roles he took up. He worked as an interpreter and then became an assistant to the Anglican minister Reverend John Stuart in 1772. As Stuart’s assistant, he translated sermons, the Gospel of St. Mark and other works into Mohawk. Even after he no longer worked for Stuart, he continued to translate religious texts into Mohawk. He would finish the Mohawk Prayer Book that he started with Stuart after the American Revolution (1775-1783). 
	With the outbreak of the American Revolution, Brant advocated for the Six Nations to support the British in the war. He travelled to Britain in 1775 with the goal of obtaining assurances that Great Britain would address long-standing Mohawk grievances. Lord George Germain, the colonial secretary, agreed to address Mohawk land disputes once the fighting was over, thus ensuring that the Mohawk would support the British in the war. Brant returned to North America and created the party Brant’s Volunteers, which was composed of Indigenous warriors and Loyalists, to fight the Americans in the war. He gained a reputation as a fierce warrior and earned the rank of captain. 
	After the war, Brant took on a more diplomatic role. In keeping with their promise, the British granted Brant a tract of land, which they bought from the Mississauga. He settled over 1,800 Six Nations people along the Grand River. This tract of land was too large for the Six Nations to cultivate so Brant leased land to the settlers who had fought alongside him. However, the Haldimand Proclamation, which granted the Six Nations the Grand River tract, did not specify how they held the land. Therefore, they did not hold the legal title to the land. The legality of Brant’s land leases was called in to question and their ambiguous legality affected the income that his leases brought in. Brant continued to negotiate with the British for the deed to Grand River and the right to sell the land until he fell sick and died in 1807.

#### THAYENDANEGEA – WARRIOR 
Thayendanegea (Joseph Brant): 1743-1807
	Thayendanegea was born in 1743 to Margaret and Peter Thowaghwengaraghkwin. His name means “two sticks of wood bound together” in the Mohawk language and represents strength and interdependence. He would later be given the name Joseph Brant when he was baptized in the Anglican church. 
He grew up in the diverse community that made up Mohawk Valley. Mohawk Valley was Mohawk land, but it had been become a multicultural community of Mohawk, German and Scots-Irish families. The Mohawks allowed these European families to settle on their land in order to prevent the British from claiming it. Economically and politically beneficial relationships became friendships as the settlers learned the Mohawk language. Thayendanegea was greatly influenced by the multicultural community in which he was raised. 
	Thayendanegea advocated for the Haudenosaunee to support the British in the American Revolution (1775-1783) as a way to protect their way of life. He travelled to Britain in 1775 to obtain assurances that Great Britain would address long-standing Mohawk grievances. Lord George Germain, the colonial secretary, agreed to address Mohawk land disputes once their dispute with the Americans was resolved, thus ensuring that the Mohawks would support the British in the war. 
Thayendanegea returned to North America and rallied support for the British cause. However, the British cause was not very popular among the Haudenosaunee; many people wanted to remain neutral. In 1778, he took a less diplomatic approach to his support of the cause. He recruited the party known as “Brant’s Volunteers”, which consisted of several Mohawk and Oquaga warriors and approximately seventy Loyalists. He proved himself to be an capable warrior and earned the British title of captain. His reputation grew beyond his accomplishments and the Americans believed, incorrectly, that he was behind almost any frontier raid. 
After the war, the Mohawks discovered that there was little to return to in Mohawk Valley. The region had been ravaged during the war and more than two hundred homes had been burnt. Furthermore, their homeland now resided within the American borders. As any leader, Thayendanegea had to ensure that his followers had were provided for with food, equipment and somewhere to settle or he would risk losing them to another leader with a better offer. Fortunately, Thayendanegea’s military prowess, his proficiency in the English language, and his influence with British officials enabled him to cast himself as a diplomat. 
Thayendanegea traveled to Quebec to remind General Haldimand of his previous promise of land. Thayendanegea scouted out the land and then Haldimand had a large tract of land on the Grand River bought from the Mississauga. Thayendanegea led over 1,800 people to settle on his tract of land. Although the war was over, Thayendanegea’s fight was not and he spent the latter part of his life trying to negotiate the sovereignty of his people with the paternalistic British empire. He fought for the deed to the Grand River and the legal right to sell the land until he got sick and died in 1807. 

#### BRANT – WARRIOR 
Joseph Brant (Thayendanegea): 1743-1807
	Joseph Brant was born in 1743 to Margaret and Peter Thowaghwengaraghkwin. His traditional name Thayendanegea, which is also his birth name, means “two sticks of wood bound together” in the Mohawk language and represents strength and interdependence. He grew up in the multicultural Mohawk Valley and learned English at Moor’s Charity School.  He would later be given the name Joseph Brant when he was baptized in the Anglican church. 
	Brant advocated for the Haudenosaunee to support the British in the American Revolution (1775-1783) as a way to protect their way of life. He travelled to Britain in 1775 to obtain assurances that Great Britain would address long-standing Mohawk grievances. Lord George Germain, the colonial secretary, agreed to address Mohawk land disputes once their dispute with the Americans was resolved, thus ensuring that the Mohawks would support the British in the war. 
Brant returned to North America and rallied support for the British cause. However, the British cause was not very popular among the Six Nations; many people wanted to remain neutral. In 1778, he took a less diplomatic approach to his support of the cause. He recruited the party known as “Brant’s Volunteers”, which consisted of several Indigenous warriors and approximately seventy Loyalists. He proved himself to be an capable warrior and earned the British title of captain. His reputation grew beyond his accomplishments and the Americans believed, incorrectly, that he was behind almost any frontier raid. 
After the war, the Mohawks discovered that there was little to return to in Mohawk Valley. The region had been ravaged during the war and more than two hundred homes had been burnt. Furthermore, their homeland now resided within the American borders. Like any leader, Brant had to ensure that his followers had were provided for with food, equipment and somewhere to settle or he would risk losing them to another leader with a better offer. Fortunately, Brant’s military prowess, his proficiency in the English language, and his influence with British officials enabled him to cast himself as a diplomat. 
Brant traveled to Quebec to remind General Haldimand of his previous promise of land. Brant scouted out the land and then Haldimand had a large tract of land on the Grand River bought from the Mississauga. Brant led over 1,800 people to settle on his tract of land. Although the war was over, Brant’s fight was not. He spent the latter part of his life trying to negotiate the independence of his people with the imperial government. He fought for the deed to the Grand River and the legal right to sell the land until he got sick and died in 1807. 

#### THAYENDANEGEA – STATESMAN – INTENT – CONCEDE TO BRITISH
Thayendanegea (Joseph Brant): 1743-1807
	Thayendanegea was born in 1743 to Margaret and Peter Thowaghwengaraghkwin. His name means “two sticks of wood bound together” in the Mohawk language and represents strength and interdependence. He would later be given the name Joseph Brant when he was baptized in the Anglican church. 
He grew up in the diverse community that made up Mohawk Valley. Mohawk Valley was Mohawk land, but it had been become a multicultural community of Mohawk, German, Scots-Irish, and interracial in families. The Mohawks allowed these European families to settle on their land in order to prevent the British from claiming it. Economically and politically beneficial relationships became friendships as the settlers learned the Mohawk language. Thayendanegea was greatly influenced by the multicultural community in which he was raised. 
	Thayendanegea advocated for the Haudenosaunee to support the British in the American Revolution (1775-1783) as the best way to preserve and improve their way of life. He travelled to Britain in 1775 to obtain assurances that Great Britain would address long-standing Mohawk grievances. Lord George Germain, the colonial secretary, agreed to address Mohawk land disputes once the American rebellion had ben resolved, thus ensuring that the Mohawk would support the British in the war. However, his support for the British would have consequences.
	After the war, the Mohawks had little to return to in Mohawk Valley. The region had been ravaged during the war and more than two hundred homes had been burnt. Furthermore, their homeland now rested within the American borders. The British had failed to protect their Indigenous allies when negotiating a peace treaty with the Americans. Individual Indigenous nations would have to negotiate their own terms of peace with the Americans. 
	 Thayendanegea’s military successes, his proficiency in the English language and his influence with British officials enabled him to adopt the role of the diplomat. He travelled to Quebec to remind General Haldimand of his earlier promise of land. Thayendanegea scouted possible tracts of land. He liked the Grand River so Haldimand had the land bought from the Mississauga. In 1784, Haldimand issued the Haldimand Proclamation, which transferred the land to the Haudenosaunee. However, the proclamation did not specify the manner in which the Haudenosaunee held the land. 
	Thayendanegea leased parts of the large tract of land to European settlers, bringing the Mohawk leasing practices from Mohawk Valley to Grand River. He sold six blocks of land to create an income for the Haudenosaunee from the annual interest they would earn from these blocks. He hoped that this income would increase the Haudenosaunee’s independence from the imperial government. However, the Royal Proclamation of 1763 stated that Indigenous peoples could only sell land to the Crown and not to individuals. British refusal to accept the legality of these sales and the Haudenosaunee’s lack of a deed meant that the state of these sales was ambiguous. 
	In 1793, Thayendanegea refused Lieutenant-Governor John Graves Simcoe’s proposed solution. Simcoe proposed a patent that reaffirm the Haldimand Proclamation, but with two changes: he shortened the northern border of the tract of land and he denied that the Haudenosaunee had the right to sell or lease their land to private individuals. Thayendanegea refused this patent and sold the blocks of land when Simcoe was away from the capital of Upper Canada. 
	The second attempt to settle the legality of Thayendanegea’s sales was a negotiation between Peter Russell, Simcoe’s temporary replacement, and Thayendanegea. Russell offered to grant the Haudenosaunee annuity equal to what they expected to raise from the sales. Brant refused this deal, so Russell proposed a new deal. The compromise was that the sales could proceed if the land was surrendered to the Crown, who would then transfer the land to the buyers. Thayendanegea, who was losing leaseholders because the ambiguity of the legality of his sales and leases, accepted this offer. 
	Despite Thayendanegea’s hopes for the sales, the Haudenosaunee became more dependent on the British afterward. The sales did not generate the proceeds that were expected. The legal status of the land was still ambiguous because the Haudenosaunee still did not have a deed for the Grand River and the Royal Proclamation of 1963 still existed. Only one of the six buyers made any payments. Thayendanegea had given away his people’s sovereignty when he accepted Russell’s offer and agreed that the Haudenosaunee did not have the right to sell their land. Thayendanegea fought for the deed to the Grand River until he got sick and died in 1807. 

#### THAYENDANEGEA – STATESMAN – INTENT – VICTORY OVER BRITISH
Thayendanegea (Joseph Brant): 1743-1807
	Thayendanegea was born in 1743 to Margaret and Peter Thowaghwengaraghkwin. His name means “two sticks of wood bound together” in the Mohawk language and represents strength and interdependence. He would later be given the name Joseph Brant when he was baptized in the Anglican church. 
He grew up in the diverse community that made up Mohawk Valley. Mohawk Valley was Mohawk land, but it had been become a multicultural community of Mohawk, German, Scots-Irish, and interracial in families. The Mohawks allowed these European families to settle on their land in order to prevent the British from claiming it. Economically and politically beneficial relationships became friendships as the settlers learned the Mohawk language. Thayendanegea was greatly influenced by the multicultural community in which he was raised. 
	Thayendanegea advocated for the Haudenosaunee to support the British in the American Revolution (1775-1783) as the best way to preserve and improve their way of life. He travelled to Britain in 1775 to obtain assurances that Great Britain would address long-standing Mohawk grievances. Lord George Germain, the colonial secretary, agreed to address Mohawk land disputes once the American rebellion had ben resolved, thus ensuring that the Mohawk would support the British in the war. 
	After the war, the Mohawks had little to return to in Mohawk Valley. The region had been ravaged during the war and more than two hundred homes had been burnt. Furthermore, their homeland now rested within the American borders. Individual Indigenous nations would have to negotiate their own terms of peace with the Americans. 
	 Thayendanegea’s military successes, his proficiency in the English language and his influence with British officials enabled him to adopt the role of the diplomat. He travelled to Quebec to remind General Haldimand of his earlier promise of land. Thayendanegea scouted possible tracts of land. He liked the Grand River so Haldimand had the land bought from the Mississauga. In 1784, Haldimand issued the Haldimand Proclamation, which transferred the land to the Haudenosaunee. However, the proclamation did not specify the manner in which the Haudenosaunee held the land. 
	Thayendanegea leased parts of the large tract of land to European settlers, bringing the Mohawk leasing practices from Mohawk Valley to Grand River. He sold six blocks of land to create an income for the Haudenosaunee from the annual interest they would earn from these blocks. He hoped that this income would increase the Haudenosaunee’s independence from the imperial government. However, the Royal Proclamation of 1763 stated that Indigenous peoples could only sell land to the Crown and not to individuals. British refusal to accept the legality of these sales and the Haudenosaunee’s lack of a deed meant that the state of these sales was ambiguous. 
	Peter Russell, a temporary Lieutenant-Governor of Upper Canada and Thayendanegea tried to settle the legality of these sales. Russell offered to grant the Haudenosaunee annuity equal to what they expected to raise from the sales. Brant refused this deal, so Russell proposed a new deal. The compromise was that the sales could proceed if the land was surrendered to the Crown, who would then transfer the land to the buyers. Thayendanegea, who was losing leaseholders because the ambiguity of the legality of his sales and leases, accepted this offer. The sales did not generate the expected profits, but the issue of their legality had been settled momentarily. 
	Thayendanegea fought to obtain the deed to the Grand River until he got sick and died in 1807.  

#### THAYENDANEGEA – STATESMAN – OUTCOME 
Thayendanegea (Joseph Brant): 1743-1807
	Thayendanegea was born in 1743 to Margaret and Peter Thowaghwengaraghkwin. His name means “two sticks of wood bound together” in the Mohawk language and represents strength and interdependence. He would later be given the name Joseph Brant when he was baptized in the Anglican church. 
He grew up in the diverse community that made up Mohawk Valley. Mohawk Valley was Mohawk land, but it had been become a multicultural community of Mohawk, German, Scots-Irish, and interracial in families. The Mohawks allowed these European families to settle on their land in order to prevent the British from claiming it. Economically and politically beneficial relationships became friendships as the settlers learned the Mohawk language. Thayendanegea was greatly influenced by the multicultural community in which he was raised. 
	Thayendanegea advocated for the Haudenosaunee to support the British in the American Revolution (1775-1783). He travelled to Britain in 1775 to obtain assurances that Great Britain would address long-standing Mohawk grievances. Lord George Germain, the colonial secretary, agreed to address Mohawk land disputes once the American rebellion had ben resolved, thus ensuring that the Mohawk would support the British in the war. However, his support for the British would have consequences.
	After the war, the Mohawks had little to return to in Mohawk Valley. The region had been ravaged during the war and more than two hundred homes had been burnt. Furthermore, their homeland now rested within the American borders. The British had failed to protect their Indigenous allies when negotiating a peace treaty with the Americans. Individual Indigenous nations would have to negotiate their own terms of peace with the Americans. 
	 Thayendanegea’s military successes, his proficiency in the English language and his influence with British officials enabled him to adopt the role of the diplomat. He travelled to Quebec to remind General Haldimand of his earlier promise of land. Thayendanegea scouted possible tracts of land. He liked the Grand River so Haldimand had the land bought from the Mississauga. In 1784, Haldimand issued the Haldimand Proclamation, which transferred the land to the Haudenosaunee. However, the proclamation did not specify the manner in which the Haudenosaunee held the land. 
	Thayendanegea leased parts of the large tract of land to European settlers, bringing the Mohawk leasing practices from Mohawk Valley to Grand River. He sold six blocks of land to create an income for the Haudenosaunee from the annual interest they would earn from these blocks. However, the Royal Proclamation of 1763 stated that Indigenous peoples could only sell land to the Crown and not to individuals. British refusal to accept the legality of these sales and the Haudenosaunee’s lack of a deed meant that the state of these sales was ambiguous. 
	In 1793, Thayendanegea refused Lieutenant-Governor John Graves Simcoe’s proposed solution. Simcoe proposed a patent that reaffirm the Haldimand Proclamation, but with two changes: he shortened the northern border of the tract of land and he denied that the Haudenosaunee had the right to sell or lease their land to private individuals. Thayendanegea refused this patent and sold the blocks of land when Simcoe was away from the capital of Upper Canada. 
	The second attempt to settle the legality of Thayendanegea’s sales was a negotiation between Peter Russell, Simcoe’s temporary replacement, and Thayendanegea. Russell offered to grant the Haudenosaunee annuity equal to what they expected to raise from the sales. Brant refused this deal, so Russell proposed a new deal. The compromise was that the sales could proceed if the land was surrendered to the Crown, who would then transfer the land to the buyers. Thayendanegea accepted this offer. 
	Despite Thayendanegea’s hopes, the sales did not generate the proceeds that were expected. The legal status of the land was still ambiguous because the Haudenosaunee still did not have a deed for the Grand River and the Royal Proclamation of 1963 still existed. Only one of the six buyers made any payments. Thayendanegea had given away his people’s sovereignty when he accepted Russell’s offer and agreed that the Haudenosaunee did not have the right to sell their land. Thayendanegea continued fighting for the deed to the Grand River until he got sick and died in 1807. 

#### BRANT – STATESMAN – INTENT – CONCEDE TO BRITISH
Joseph Brant (Thayendanegea): 1743-1807
	Brant was born in 1743 to Margaret and Peter Thowaghwengaraghkwin. His traditional name Thayendanegea, which is also his birth name, means “two sticks of wood bound together” in the Mohawk language and represents strength and interdependence. He grew up in the multicultural Mohawk Valley and learned English at Moor’s Charity School. He would later be given the name Joseph Brant when he was baptized in the Anglican church.
	Brant advocated for the Iroquois to support the British in the American Revolution (1775-1783) as the best way to preserve and improve their way of life. He travelled to Britain in 1775 to obtain assurances that Great Britain would address long-standing Mohawk grievances. Lord George Germain, the colonial secretary, agreed to address Mohawk land disputes once the American rebellion had ben resolved, thus ensuring that the Mohawk would support the British in the war. However, his support for the British would have consequences.
	After the war, the Mohawks had little to return to in Mohawk Valley. The region had been ravaged during the war and more than two hundred homes had been burnt. Furthermore, their homeland now rested within the American borders. The British had failed to protect their Indigenous allies when negotiating a peace treaty with the Americans. Individual Indigenous nations would have to negotiate their own terms of peace with the Americans. 
	 Brant’s military successes, his proficiency in the English language and his influence with British officials enabled him to adopt the role of the diplomat. He travelled to Quebec to remind General Haldimand of his earlier promise of land. Brant scouted possible tracts of land. He liked the Grand River so Haldimand had the land bought from the Mississauga. In 1784, Haldimand issued the Haldimand Proclamation, which transferred the land to the Iroquois. However, the proclamation did not specify the manner in which the Iroquois held the land. 
	Brant leased parts of the large tract of land to European settlers. He sold six blocks of land to create an income for the Iroquois from the annual interest they would earn from these blocks. He hoped that this income would increase the Iroquois’s independence from the imperial government. However, the Royal Proclamation of 1763 stated that Indigenous peoples could only sell land to the Crown and not to individuals. The British refusal to accept the legality of these sales and the Iroquois’s lack of a deed meant that the state of these sales was ambiguous. 
	In 1793, Brant refused Lieutenant-Governor John Graves Simcoe’s proposed solution. Simcoe proposed a patent that reaffirm the Haldimand Proclamation, but with two changes: he shortened the northern border of the tract of land and he denied that the Haudenosaunee had the right to sell or lease their land to private individuals. Brant refused this patent and sold the blocks of land when Simcoe was away from the capital of Upper Canada. 
	The second attempt to settle the legality of Brant’s sales was a negotiation between Peter Russell, Simcoe’s temporary replacement, and Brant. Russell offered to grant the Iroquois annuity equal to what they expected to raise from the sales. Brant refused this deal, so Russell proposed a new deal. The compromise was that the sales could proceed if the land was surrendered to the Crown, who would then transfer the land to the buyers. Brant, who was losing leaseholders because the ambiguity of the legality of his sales and leases, accepted this offer. 
	Despite Brant’s hopes for the sales, the Haudenosaunee became more dependent on the British afterward. The sales did not generate the proceeds that were expected. The legal status of the land was still ambiguous because the Haudenosaunee still did not have a deed for the Grand River and the Royal Proclamation of 1963 still existed. Only one of the six buyers made any payments. Brant had given away his people’s sovereignty when he accepted Russell’s offer and agreed that the Haudenosaunee did not have the right to sell their land. Brant fought for the deed to the Grand River until he got sick and died in 1807. 

#### BRANT – STATESMAN – INTENT – VICTORY OVER BRITISH
Joseph Brant (Thayendanegea): 1743-1807
	Brant was born in 1743 to Margaret and Peter Thowaghwengaraghkwin. His traditional name Thayendanegea, which is also his birth name, means “two sticks of wood bound together” in the Mohawk language and represents strength and interdependence. He grew up in the multicultural Mohawk Valley and learned English at Moor’s Charity School. He would later be given the name Joseph Brant when he was baptized in the Anglican church.
	Brant advocated for the Iroquois to support the British in the American Revolution (1775-1783) as the best way to preserve and improve their way of life. He travelled to Britain in 1775 to obtain assurances that Great Britain would address long-standing Mohawk grievances. Lord George Germain, the colonial secretary, agreed to address Mohawk land disputes once the American rebellion had ben resolved, thus ensuring that the Mohawk would support the British in the war. 
	After the war, the Mohawks had little to return to in Mohawk Valley. The region had been ravaged during the war and more than two hundred homes had been burnt. Furthermore, their homeland now rested within the American borders. Individual Indigenous nations would have to negotiate their own terms of peace with the Americans. 
	 Brant’s military successes, his proficiency in the English language and his influence with British officials enabled him to adopt the role of the diplomat. He travelled to Quebec to remind General Haldimand of his earlier promise of land. Brant scouted possible tracts of land. He liked the Grand River so Haldimand had the land bought from the Mississauga. In 1784, Haldimand issued the Haldimand Proclamation, which transferred the land to the Iroquois. However, the proclamation did not specify the manner in which the Iroquois held the land. 
	Brant leased parts of the large tract of land to European settlers. He sold six blocks of land to create an income for the Iroquois from the annual interest they would earn from these blocks. He hoped that this income would increase the Iroquois’s independence from the imperial government. However, the Royal Proclamation of 1763 stated that Indigenous peoples could only sell land to the Crown and not to individuals. The British refusal to accept the legality of these sales and the Iroquois’s lack of a deed meant that the state of these sales was ambiguous.  
	Peter Russell, a temporary replacement for Lieutenant-Governor John Graves Simcoe, and Brant attempted to settle the legality of Brant’s land sales. Russell offered to grant the Iroquois annuity equal to what they expected to raise from the sales. Brant refused this deal, so Russell proposed a new deal. The compromise was that the sales could proceed if the land was surrendered to the Crown, who would then transfer the land to the buyers. Brant, who was losing leaseholders because the ambiguity of the legality of his sales and leases, accepted this offer. The sales did not generate the expected profits, but the issue of their legality had been settled momentarily. 
	Thayendanegea fought to obtain the deed to the Grand River until he got sick and died in 1807.  

#### BRANT – STATESMAN – OUTCOME – PROTECT
Joseph Brant (Thayendanegea): 1743-1807
	Brant was born in 1743 to Margaret and Peter Thowaghwengaraghkwin. His traditional name Thayendanegea, which is also his birth name, means “two sticks of wood bound together” in the Mohawk language and represents strength and interdependence. He grew up in the multicultural Mohawk Valley and learned English at Moor’s Charity School. He would later be given the name Joseph Brant when he was baptized in the Anglican church.
	Brant advocated for the Iroquois to support the British in the American Revolution (1775-1783). He travelled to Britain in 1775 to obtain assurances that Great Britain would address long-standing Mohawk grievances. Lord George Germain, the colonial secretary, agreed to address Mohawk land disputes once the American rebellion had ben resolved, thus ensuring that the Mohawk would support the British in the war. However, his support for the British would have consequences.
	After the war, the Mohawks had little to return to in Mohawk Valley. The region had been ravaged during the war and more than two hundred homes had been burnt. Furthermore, their homeland now rested within the American borders. The British had failed to protect their Indigenous allies when negotiating a peace treaty with the Americans. Individual Indigenous nations would have to negotiate their own terms of peace with the Americans. 
	 Brant’s military successes, his proficiency in the English language and his influence with British officials enabled him to adopt the role of the diplomat. He travelled to Quebec to remind General Haldimand of his earlier promise of land. Brant scouted possible tracts of land. He liked the Grand River so Haldimand had the land bought from the Mississauga. In 1784, Haldimand issued the Haldimand Proclamation, which transferred the land to the Iroquois. However, the proclamation did not specify the manner in which the Iroquois held the land. 
	Brant leased parts of the large tract of land to European settlers. He sold six blocks of land to create an income for the Iroquois from the annual interest they would earn from these blocks. However, the Royal Proclamation of 1763 stated that Indigenous peoples could only sell land to the Crown and not to individuals. The British refusal to accept the legality of these sales and the Iroquois’s lack of a deed meant that the state of these sales was ambiguous. 
	In 1793, Brant refused Lieutenant-Governor John Graves Simcoe’s proposed solution. Simcoe proposed a patent that reaffirm the Haldimand Proclamation, but with two changes: he shortened the northern border of the tract of land and he denied that the Haudenosaunee had the right to sell or lease their land to private individuals. Brant refused this patent and sold the blocks of land when Simcoe was away from the capital of Upper Canada. 
	The second attempt to settle the legality of Brant’s sales was a negotiation between Peter Russell, Simcoe’s temporary replacement, and Brant. Russell offered to grant the Iroquois annuity equal to what they expected to raise from the sales. Brant refused this deal, so Russell proposed a new deal. The compromise was that the sales could proceed if the land was surrendered to the Crown, who would then transfer the land to the buyers. Brant accepted this offer. 
	Despite Brant’s hopes, the sales did not generate the proceeds that were expected. The legal status of the land was still ambiguous because the Haudenosaunee still did not have a deed for the Grand River and the Royal Proclamation of 1963 still existed. Only one of the six buyers made any payments. Brant had given away his people’s sovereignty when he accepted Russell’s offer and agreed that the Haudenosaunee did not have the right to sell their land. Brant fought for the deed to the Grand River until he got sick and died in 1807. 
